Go: Roll the dice (#3310)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/go/getting-started.md

---
title: Getting Started
weight: 10
# prettier-ignore
cSpell:ignore: chan fatalln funcs intn itoa khtml otelhttp rolldice stdouttrace strconv
---

This page will show you how to get started with OpenTelemetry in Go.

> You will learn how you can instrument a simple application automatically, in
> such a way that [traces][] and [metrics][] are emitted to the console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will learn how you can instrument a simple application using
instrumentation libraries and custom instrumentation with
OpenTelemetry APIs. You'll create [traces][] and [metrics][] and emit
them to the console.
```

Reviewer: Bigger suggestion here -- since we're not using the go autoinstrumentation agent (maybe that comes in the future!) I think it's worth rephrasing here to emphasize libraries and custom instrumentation with APIs.

Author: Should I also mention the SDK? Is isn't the term "OpenTelemetry APIs confusing (because there is also OpenTelemetry API)?

I will simply change to

```suggestion
You will learn how you can manually instrument a simple application, in
such a way that [traces][] and [metrics][] are emitted to the console.
```

But I am open for further suggestions.

PS. I have created https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3308 before this PR and I have forgotten to remove "automatically" 🤦

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3310/commits/9b0888dec9fca709e284ca90540c56fe1705ea42

                "Bounds": [
                  0, 5, 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 250, 500, 750, 1000, 2500, 5000,
                  7500, 10000
                ],
                "BucketCounts": [
                  0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0
                ],
                "Min": {},
                "Max": {},
                "Sum": 0.056117
              }
            ],
            "Temporality": "CumulativeTemporality"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

</details>

## Custom instrumentation

Instrumentation libraries captures telemetry at the edges of your systems, such
as inbound and outbound HTTP requests, but it doesn't capture what's going on in
your application. For that you'll need to write some custom
[manual instrumentation](../manual/).

Modify `rolldice.go` to include custom instrumentation using OpenTelemetry API:

```go
package main

import (
	"io"
	"log"
	"math/rand"
	"net/http"
	"strconv"

	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel"
	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/attribute"
	"go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric"
)

var (
	tracer  = otel.Tracer("rolldice")
	meter   = otel.Meter("rolldice")
	rollCnt metric.Int64Counter
)

func init() {
	var err error

> 	rollCnt, err = meter.Int64Counter("roll_counter",

Reviewer 2: Since otel seems to prefer dots to underscores, lets use that here.  Also, probably not best to include the type in the name, so maybe `dice.rolls` as the name?

Author: I agree. I will also update in other places.

Author: Resolved with https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3310/commits/f3cf8cc53f4e9d2029521be050cd0bb71c770e7b

		metric.WithDescription("The number of rolls by roll value"),
		metric.WithUnit("{roll}"))
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
}

func rolldice(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {

> 	ctx, span := tracer.Start(r.Context(), "do_roll")

Reviewer 2: same comment as above.  Maybe `dice.roll`?

Author: I will change to simply `roll` as this is the name of the operation. 

For span names I think we rather not use prefixes. See:
- https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/http/http-spans/#name
- https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/database/database-spans/

Author: Resolved with https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/commit/f3cf8cc53f4e9d2029521be050cd0bb71c770e7b
